# @guardian/prosemirror-elements

This Prosemirror plugin adds the ability to add custom 'elements' to a document.


- [@guardian/prosemirror-elements](#guardianprosemirror-elements)
  - [Why does this exist?](#why-does-this-exist)
  - [Setup](#setup)
  - [Run](#run)
  - [Test](#test)
  - [Release](#release)
    - [Testing locally in applications using `prosemirror-elements`](#testing-locally-in-applications-using-prosemirror-elements)
  - [Adding a new element using prosemirror-elements](#adding-a-new-element-using-prosemirror-elements)
  - [How prosemirror-elements works](#how-prosemirror-elements-works)
  - [Troubleshooting when developing this library](#troubleshooting-when-developing-this-library)
    - [Problems with `yarn link`](#problems-with-yarn-link)


## Why does this exist?

Modelling non-text content in Prosemirror can be tricky. `prosemirror-elements` provides an abstraction that makes it easy to write custom elements that:

- contain user-defined fields that model many different kinds of content, including rich text fields and arbitrary data
- are first class citizens of the Prosemirror schema (for example, nested rich text fields play nicely with collaborative editing)
- are renderer-agnostic (we use React as a default)

## Working on composer prosemirror-elements
A note for guardian developers - in https://github.com/guardian/flexible-content/pull/4410 a number of elements were moved from this repo into the flexible-content
repo to improve the developer feedback loop when working on the elements. If you are making a change intended for composer then you should make the changes within the
flexible-content repo. 

## Setup

1. Ensure you have `dev-nginx` and `yarn` installed on your local machine.
2. Run the setup script: `./script/setup.sh`

## Run

1. Ensure nginx is running.
2. `yarn start` builds the project locally, spins up a webserver on https://prosemirror-elements.local.dev-gutools.co.uk, and watches for file changes.

## Test

- Run the unit tests via Jest with `yarn test:unit`.
- Run the integration tests via Cypress with `yarn test:integration`.
  - You'll need to be running the application via `yarn start` simultaneously for the tests to work – make sure the server is responding on http://localhost:7890 before running the tests.
  - For reasons we're not yet able to determine, Cypress won't run your tests immediately when you select them in the GUI. Hit the 'refresh' button and they should run normally.

## Release

This repository uses [changesets](https://github.com/changesets/changesets) for version management

To release a new version with your changes, run `yarn changeset add` and follow the prompts. This will create a new changeset file in the `.changeset` directory. Commit this file with your PR.

When your PR is merged, Changesets will create a PR to release the new version.

### Testing locally in applications using `prosemirror-elements`

We've found yalc useful in testing local changes to prosemirror-elements in applications that use it.

Setup:

1. Install `yalc` globally with `npm i yalc -g` or `yarn global add yalc`.
2. Run `yarn yalc` in your local project from your current branch, to build the project and push changes to yalc.
3. Run `yalc add @guardian/prosemirror-elements` within the project consuming prosemirror-elements locally.

Note: any changes you make to your local prosemirror-elements branch must be republished (step 3). Don't forget to run `yarn yalc` again!

## Adding a new element using prosemirror-elements

[Quick-Start Guide](https://github.com/guardian/prosemirror-elements/blob/main/docs/quick-start.md)

## How prosemirror-elements works

[How prosemirror-elements works](https://github.com/guardian/prosemirror-elements/blob/main/docs/how-it-works.md)

## Troubleshooting when developing this library

### Problems with `yarn link`

ProseMirror and its dependencies sometimes use object identity checks (e.g. `instanceof`). When using `yarn link`, it's possible for the consuming code to bundle different versions of dependencies simultaneously. This can be difficult to work around. It will not happen during a normal install.

We recommend using `yalc` to avoid this issue, but it's also possible to work around it.

One known instance of this occurs when appending the `NodeSpec` generated by the library to the parent editor schema. This would normally be accomplished by appending it to a parent schema, like so:

```ts
const mySchema = new Schema({
  nodes: OrderedMap.from(schema.spec.nodes).append(nodeSpec),
  marks,
});
```

This may fail if your bundler has included the `ordered-map` dependency twice in your project. Because `ordered-map` uses `instanceof` to determine if an incoming object is an `OrderedMap`, the incoming object will fail this check, despite it being the correct shape.

As a workaround, try reconstructing the map as an object:

```ts
const objectNodeSpec: Record<string, NodeSpec> = {};
nodeSpec.forEach((key, value) => (objectNodeSpec[key] = value as NodeSpec));

const mySchema = new Schema({
  nodes: OrderedMap.from(schema.spec.nodes).append(objectNodeSpec),
  marks,
});
```
